README.md, before:

## AWS CRT Python

[![Version](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/awscrt.svg?style=flat)](https://pypi.org/project/awscrt/)

Python 3 bindings for the AWS Common Runtime.

*   [API documentation](https://awslabs.github.io/aws-crt-python)
*   [Development guide](guides/dev/README.md) for contributors to aws-crt-python's source code.

## License

This library is licensed under the Apache 2.0 License.

## Minimum Requirements:

*   Python 3.7+

## Installation

To install from pip:

```bash
python3 -m pip install awscrt
```

To install from Github:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/awslabs/aws-crt-python.git
cd aws-crt-python
git submodule update --init
python3 -m pip install .
```

To use from your Python application, declare `awscrt` as a dependency in your `setup.py` file.

### OpenSSL and LibCrypto (Unix only)

aws-crt-python does not use OpenSSL for TLS.
On Apple and Windows devices, the OS's default TLS library is used.
On Unix devices, [s2n-tls](https://github.com/aws/s2n-tls) is used.
But s2n-tls uses libcrypto, the cryptography math library bundled with OpenSSL.

To simplify installation, aws-crt-python has its own copy of libcrypto.
This lets you install a wheel from PyPI without having OpenSSL installed.
Unix wheels on PyPI come with libcrypto statically compiled in.
Code to build libcrypto comes from [AWS-LC](https://github.com/aws/aws-lc).
AWS-LC's code is included in the PyPI source package,
and the git repository includes it as a submodule.

If you need aws-crt-python to use the libcrypto included on your system,
set environment variable `AWS_CRT_BUILD_USE_SYSTEM_LIBCRYPTO=1` while building from source:

```sh
AWS_CRT_BUILD_USE_SYSTEM_LIBCRYPTO=1 python3 -m pip install --no-binary :all: --verbose awscrt
```
( `--no-binary :all:` ensures you do not use the precompiled wheel from PyPI)

You can ignore all this on Windows and Apple platforms, where aws-crt-python
uses the OS's default libraries for TLS and cryptography math.

### AWS_CRT_BUILD_USE_SYSTEM_LIBS ###

aws-crt-python depends on several C libraries that make up the AWS Common Runtime (libaws-c-common, libaws-c-s3, etc).
By default, these libraries are built along with aws-crt-python and statically compiled in
(their source code is under [crt/](crt/)).

To skip building these dependencies, because they're already available on your system,
set environment variable `AWS_CRT_BUILD_USE_SYSTEM_LIBS=1` while building from source:

```sh
AWS_CRT_BUILD_USE_SYSTEM_LIBS=1 python3 -m pip install .
```

## Mac-Only TLS Behavior

Please note that on Mac, once a private key is used with a certificate, that certificate-key pair is imported into the Mac Keychain. All subsequent uses of that certificate will use the stored private key and ignore anything passed in programmatically. Beginning in v0.6.2, when a stored private key from the Keychain is used, the following will be logged at the "info" log level:

```
static: certificate has an existing certificate-key pair that was previously imported into the Keychain. Using key from Keychain instead of the one provided.
```

## Crash Handler
You can enable the crash handler by setting the environment variable `AWS_CRT_CRASH_HANDLER=1`. This will print the callstack to `stderr` in the event of a fatal error.

Commit message:

AWS_CRT_BUILD_FORCE_STATIC_LIBS

README.md, after:

## AWS CRT Python

[![Version](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/awscrt.svg?style=flat)](https://pypi.org/project/awscrt/)

Python 3 bindings for the AWS Common Runtime.

*   [API documentation](https://awslabs.github.io/aws-crt-python)
*   [Development guide](guides/dev/README.md) for contributors to aws-crt-python's source code.

## License

This library is licensed under the Apache 2.0 License.

## Minimum Requirements:

*   Python 3.7+

## Installation

To install from pip:

```bash
python3 -m pip install awscrt
```

To install from Github:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/awslabs/aws-crt-python.git
cd aws-crt-python
git submodule update --init
python3 -m pip install .
```

To use from your Python application, declare `awscrt` as a dependency in your `setup.py` file.

### OpenSSL and LibCrypto (Unix only)

aws-crt-python does not use OpenSSL for TLS.
On Apple and Windows devices, the OS's default TLS library is used.
On Unix devices, [s2n-tls](https://github.com/aws/s2n-tls) is used.
But s2n-tls uses libcrypto, the cryptography math library bundled with OpenSSL.

To simplify installation, aws-crt-python has its own copy of libcrypto.
This lets you install a wheel from PyPI without having OpenSSL installed.
Unix wheels on PyPI come with libcrypto statically compiled in.
Code to build libcrypto comes from [AWS-LC](https://github.com/aws/aws-lc).
AWS-LC's code is included in the PyPI source package,
and the git repository includes it as a submodule.

If you need aws-crt-python to use the libcrypto included on your system,
set environment variable `AWS_CRT_BUILD_USE_SYSTEM_LIBCRYPTO=1` while building from source:

```sh
AWS_CRT_BUILD_USE_SYSTEM_LIBCRYPTO=1 python3 -m pip install --no-binary :all: --verbose awscrt
```
( `--no-binary :all:` ensures you do not use the precompiled wheel from PyPI)

You can ignore all this on Windows and Apple platforms, where aws-crt-python
uses the OS's default libraries for TLS and cryptography math.

### AWS_CRT_BUILD_USE_SYSTEM_LIBS ###

aws-crt-python depends on several C libraries that make up the AWS Common Runtime (libaws-c-common, libaws-c-s3, etc).
By default, these libraries are built along with aws-crt-python and statically compiled in
(their source code is under [crt/](crt/)).

To skip building these dependencies, because they're already available on your system,
set environment variable `AWS_CRT_BUILD_USE_SYSTEM_LIBS=1` while building from source:

```sh
AWS_CRT_BUILD_USE_SYSTEM_LIBS=1 python3 -m pip install .
```

If these dependencies are available as both static and shared libs, you can force the static ones to be used by setting: `AWS_CRT_BUILD_FORCE_STATIC_LIBS=1`

## Mac-Only TLS Behavior

Please note that on Mac, once a private key is used with a certificate, that certificate-key pair is imported into the Mac Keychain. All subsequent uses of that certificate will use the stored private key and ignore anything passed in programmatically. Beginning in v0.6.2, when a stored private key from the Keychain is used, the following will be logged at the "info" log level:

```
static: certificate has an existing certificate-key pair that was previously imported into the Keychain. Using key from Keychain instead of the one provided.
```

## Crash Handler
You can enable the crash handler by setting the environment variable `AWS_CRT_CRASH_HANDLER=1`. This will print the callstack to `stderr` in the event of a fatal error.
